###Distributed Topology Construction of Bluetooth Wireless Personal Area Networks (https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/1e45/1c35db078fba05cc9b6daf8c21592f98c388.pdf) 

Abstract:
Bluetooth, a wireless technology based on a frequency hopping physical layer, enables portable devices to form short-range wireless ad hoc networks. 
Thus, even if all nodes are within proximity of each other, only those nodes which are synchronized with the transmitter can hear the transmission.


Introduction:
An ad hoc network is a wireless network formed by nodes that cooperate with each other to forward packets in the network.
We aim to address a problem that arises when multiple channels are available for communication in an ad hoc network. The problem is determining which subgroup of nodes should share a common channel and which nodes should act as relays, forwarding traf?c from one channel to another. 

We address an instance of the above problem which occurs in Bluetooth-based ad hoc networks, known as scatternets. 
Bluetooth is a promising technology that aims to support wireless connectivity among cell phones, headsets, PDAs, digital cameras, and laptop computers.

Bluetooth is a frequency hopping system which de?nes multiple channels for communication (each channel de?ned by a different frequency hopping sequence).
A group of devices sharing a common channel is called a piconet. Each piconet has a master unit which selects a frequency hopping sequence for the piconet and controls access to the channel. Other participants of the group, known as slave units, are synchronized to the hopping sequence of the piconet master. [Within a piconet, the channel is shared using a slotted Time Division Duplex (TDD) protocol where a master uses a polling protocol to allocate timeslots to slave nodes.]

Piconets can also be interconnected via bridge nodes to form a larger ad hoc network known as a scatternet.
Bridge nodes are capable of timesharing between multiple piconets, receiving data from one piconet and forwarding it to another. There is no restriction on the role a bridge node can play in each piconet it participates in. A bridge can be a master in one piconet and slave in others (M/S bridge) or a slave in multiple piconets (S/S bridge).

In Figure 1(b) all nodes are part of a single piconet. Figure 1(c) illustrates another con?guration where node A is master of piconet 1, node E is master of piconet 3, node B is an M/S bridge (master of piconet 2 and a slave of piconet 1), node D is a slave of piconet 1 and node C is an S/S bridge (slave in piconets 2 and 3). 
[In contrast to these scatternet con?gurations the node interconnection topology in a single channel system will be a complete graph (Fig. 1(a)) since all nodes will hear each other’s transmissions.]

[The Bluetooth setting introduces two unique challenges: ?rst, no broadcast channel exists for facilitating the exchange of any control information, including proximity information; second, even if proximity information is available, the piconet membership constraint renders the formation of a connected topology a very challenging task.]

We then propose the Bluetooth Topology Construction Protocol (BTCP), an asynchronous distributed protocol that extends the point-to-point symmetric mechanism to the case of several nodes. 
BTCP is based on a distributed leader election process where proximity information is discovered in a progressive manner and eventually accumulated to an elected coordinator node. Given a view of the topology, the coordinator can then use a centralized algorithm to form a connected scatternet topology. 

WPAN applications require scatternet formation in a short amount of time that is tolerable by a human user. 

This is a valid assumption for Wireless Personal Area Networks (WPANs), currently considered by the IEEE 802.15 standard [16]. 
Compared to other forms of ad hoc networks, such as Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANETs) or sensor networks, WPANs are characterized by a relatively small number of low-power devices operating within a limited geographic area (e.g. a conference room). In addition to connectivity, WPAN applications require scatternet formation in a short amount of time that is tolerable by a human user.


LINK ESTABLISHMENT IN BLUETOOTH:

Bluetooth link establishment is a two-step process that involves the Inquiry and Paging procedures [17].
Both procedures are asymmetric, involving two types of nodes that perform different actions: during Inquiry, senders discover and collect neighborhood information provided by receivers; during Paging, senders connect to previously discovered receivers. 

The functional difference between the two procedures is that Inquiry uses a universal frequency hopping sequence while Paging uses a common point-to-point frequency hopping sequence. 
Using a universal frequency hopping sequence, a sender node effectively broadcasts an Inquiry Access Code (IAC) packet that can be heard by receiver nodes listening for such a packet. 
During the paging procedure, a sender uses a receiver’s page hopping sequence and effectively unicasts a Device Access Code (DAC) packet to be heard only by this receiver. 
Hence, Inquiry involves many units where a sender can discover more than one receiver while Paging involves only two units where a sender pages and connects to a speci?c receiver.

The Asymmetric Protocol:

The asymmetric Bluetooth link establishment protocol (Fig. 2) begins by the sender entering the INQUIRY state and the receiver entering the INQUIRY SCAN state. 
After an initial FS delay, the sender transmits on the frequency hop the receiver is listening to. 
Upon reception of the IAC packet, the receiver sleeps for a random time interval (called RB delay), uniformly distributed between 0 and rmax(= 639.375ms). 
The random back-off is performed to avoid collision at the sender in case two or more receivers were listening on the same frequency hop and responded simultaneously. 

When the receiver wakes up, it tunes to the hop it was listening before the back-off occurred. 
When the receiver wakes up, it tunes to the hop it was listening before the back-off occurred. After a second FS delay, an IAC packet is received; the receiver replies with an FHS packet and starts listening on its page hopping sequence by entering the PAGE SCAN state.
The FHS packet contains the identity and clock of the receiver. Upon reception of the FHS packet, the sender initiates the Paging procedure by entering the PAGE state. 
The identity and clock in the FHS packet are used to determine the receiver’s page hopping sequence and current listening hop, respectively. Thus, when paging follows inquiry, the FS delay is eliminated and the sender transmits a DAC packet on the receiver’s listening hop.

The remaining control messages are exchanged in consecutive slots.
The receiver replies with a DAC packet. 
The sender transmits a FHS packet to let the receiver determine its channel hopping sequence and phase.
As soon as the sender receives the DAC acknowledgment, it becomes the link master. 
The receiver acknowledges with another DAC packet and becomes the link slave. 
After an additional POLL/NULL packet exchange, the synchronized nodes may start exchanging data.


A SYMMETRIC LINK ESTABLISHMENT PROTOCOL:

Links can be automatically established using the following symmetric mechanism: When a node is powered on, it arbitrarily assumes sender or receiver role by entering the INQUIRY or INQUIRY SCAN state, respectively.
The node remains in the selected state for a period of of time. If during this time no connection is established, it switches to the opposite state. State alteration continues until a connection occurs. 

Nodes execute the protocol independently; they will be able to connect only during intervals where they are in opposite states.
During such an interval, the asymmetric protocol is automatically executed. 
The sender will become aware of the receiver only when it receives the FHS packet after a random delay R.
If during this time the sender independently switches to the receiver state, connection will not occur. 
On the receiver end, the reception of the IAC packets, back-off activity and transmission of FHS packets are not communicated to the upper layers of the Bluetooth stack. 
Since we can only have explicit control at the upper layers and since we need to devise a symmetric protocol without modifying the Bluetooth Speci?cation, we assume that the receiver becomes aware of the sender only after paging and link establishment. 
...


SCATTERNET FORMATION:

Suppose that several users wish to form an ad hoc network using their Bluetooth devices. 
Each user powers on his/her device and expects to see a ”network established” message after a short period of time. 
After this message appears, the user will be able to exchange information with every other user. 
The high-level description of this application, embodies the elements of a successful scatternet formation protocol: 
- Network establishment must be performed in a distributed manner. Each device must start operating asynchronously on its own without any prior knowledge of the identities or number of nodes participating in the process.
- Network establishment delay must be tolerable by the end-user and minimized as much as possible.
- Upon completion, the protocol must yield a connected scatternet [that satis?es the Bluetooth degree constraint of 7 slaves per piconet].


THE BLUETOOTH TOPOLOGY CONSTRUCTION PROTOCOL (BTCP):

BTCP is based on a leader election process. 
Since the nodes start asynchronously and without any knowledge of the number of participating nodes, an elected coordinator will be able to control the process and ensure that the resulting topology will satisfy the scatternet formation criteria.
The protocol consists of 3 phases:

Phase I: Coordinator Election :
Phase I consists of an asynchronous distributed election of a coordinator node that will eventually know the count, identities and clocks of all nodes participating in the topology construction process. 
Each node has an integer variable called VOTES. Upon power-on, a node initializes VOTES to 1, and starts executing the symmetric link establishment protocol using a randomized schedule. 

Any two nodes that discover each other and connect enter a one-on-one confrontation by comparing their VOTES. The node with the larger VOTES wins the confrontation. If the VOTES are equal, the winner is the node with the larger Bluetooth address.
The loser provides the winner with all the FHS packets (i.e. identities and clocks) of the nodes it has won thus far.
[Then, it disconnects and enters the PAGE SCAN state. In this way, it will hear only page messages from nodes that will page it in the future. This action eliminates the loser from the leader election and prepares it for the next phases of the protocol. ]
Upon receiving the FHS packets, the winner increases its VOTES by the loser VOTES and continues participating in the leader election by resuming execution of the symmetric protocol. 
The rest of the nodes are in the PAGE SCAN state, waiting to be paged by a node that has information about them.

Phase II: Role Determination:
After the election of Phase I, the coordinator has acquired the identities and clocks of all nodes participating in scatternet formation. 
The coordinator initiates Phase II by checking if the number of nodes N is less than8. If this is the case, it pages and connects to all other nodes that are waiting in PAGE SCAN; a single piconet is formed with the coordinator as master and the rest of the nodes as slaves.
If N = 8, several piconets must be formed and interconnected via bridge nodes. Given the global view of the network, the coordinator can decide on the role each node will perform in the ?nal scatternet. Node-speci?c scatternet formation criteria can be communicated to the coordinator during the election process as well as the FHS information.
In absence of speci?c requirements, use the one default criteria.
Next, the coordinator pages and connects to the nodes it selected as masters. 
A temporary piconet is formed with the coordinator as master and the designated masters as slaves. 
The coordinator transmits to each designated master its connectivity list set and instructs the designated masters to start phase III; then it disconnects the temporary piconet and starts phase III as a master.

Phase III: Connection Establishment :
Phase III is initiated by the designated masters (including the coordinator). Each master pages and connects to the slaves and bridges provided in its SLAVESLIST and BRIDGELIST, respectively. 
As soon as a node is noti?ed by its master that it is a bridge, it waits to be paged by its second master
When this happens, the bridge node sends a CONNECTED noti?cation to its masters.
When a master receives a CONNECTED noti?cation from all its assigned bridges, a fully connected scatternet of P piconets is guaranteed to be formed and the protocol terminates.

Leader election termination :

[Ideally, election should stop as soon as the coordinator is elected. However, since a node is not aware of the total number of participants, it will never know whether or not it is the winner of the election. Each node maintains a ”state alteration” timeout variable called ALT TIMEOUT. ALT TIMEOUT is set upon power-on and reset each time the node wins a confrontation and restarts the symmetric link establishment protocol. When ALT TIMEOUT expires, the node assumes it is the elected coordinator. ]

It is important to determine an appropriate value for ALT TIMEOUT. A very large value will result in a node having won the competition and continuing alternating without knowing it is the only one left.
Using a very short ALT TIMEOUT, several nodes may assume the role of coordinator; this will result in a disconnected scatternet.
The delay analysis of the two-node symmetric link establishment protocol can be used to provide a tight estimate for ALT TIMEOUT.

(ver figura 6)


RELATED WORK:

O BTCP é distribuído e assíncrono; Fornece também mais flexibilidade na formação da topologia WPAN final devido à sua fase centralizada de atribuição de funções.


CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION:

In ad hoc networks using frequency hopping technology, nodes can be grouped in multiple communication channels. 

